[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Wisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, we're still here at Jackson Hall.
It's funny saying things like we're
still here because we're recording all
these episodes at the same time and we
don't really know exactly when you're
listening. But this is yet another
Jackson Hole episode.
>> Another special missive from Jackson
Hole. So I think there's like an element
if uh if I'm being honest a certain
surreality of Jackson hold this year
because it is an academic conference
historically and you know the setting
aside the chairman's speech which we'll
uh talk about more setting aside that
speech you know it's a place for like
talking about important issues and yeah
academic economics and that's great and
I love that stuff and it's super
interesting and all that and yet the big
story is really the attack on the whole
premise on the independent central banks
and yet it's sort of like feels like
everything but that gets talked about.
>> I think that's right. And you said
setting aside Pal's speech, but it was
very very noticeable that in his speech
he could have taken it as an opportunity
to talk about things like central bank
independence or things like data
integrity given what's been happening at
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, but he
chose not to.
>> Yeah, great point. You're right. Like he
could have I because we're wondering
like you know this is going to be his
last speech last time speaking as the
Federal Reserve chairman. So he could
have said something really big about
reflecting on a career of being a
central banker and the importance of all
these things and he he gave a uh you
know macroeconomic policy speech.
>> There's also this other layer which is a
lot of what he's trying to do now which
seems to be to focus on labor market
deterioration and maybe look through
some of the upside risks to inflation
right now. that only happens if you have
a credible central bank that can pin
longer term expectations for inflation
down. Like
>> yes,
>> the only reason he's able to do some of
this is because of the credibility the
social capital that the Fed has built up
over decades.
>> Exactly right. And the reason why we're
talking about this, just to be very
clear, it's because of the attacks from
the Trump administration on Jerome
Powell, also other uh Fed governors,
also, you know, the whole thing. And
this is just part and parcel of one
attempt to sort of you know restructure
how the US does both domestic and
international policy because there's the
tariffs obviously and those intersect
with monetary policy but then there's
just also the sort of changing
relationship with other countries that
gets into things like you know like
let's get like payment for security or
something like that like big so many
like big hinges and pivots at one point
>> it's I mean I don't think it's hyperbole
to say it's a attempt at restructuring
of the global order both in terms of the
economy via the international financial
system and also in terms of security. I
think the confusing part for me is I it
is a fact that America has the world's
biggest economy. America came through
the pandemic a lot better than a lot of
other countries. We ended up having
lower inflation than a lot of other
parts in the world. And yet the Trump
administration seems very very convinced
that the US is somehow losing out from
the current international order or maybe
they feel that there's just more that
they could get from restructuring it. So
I think we should talk about maybe the
motivations behind some of this and then
what the new world could possibly look
like.
>> Well, we literally have the perfect
guest, someone we've had on the someone
who we always catch up with in Jackson
Hall.
>> It's becoming a tradition. It's a
tradition and he's literally the perfect
guest because he used to be on the
monetary policy committee at the Bank of
England. So he has all the uh monetary
policy bonafides. He is currently the
president of the Peterson Institute for
International Economics and he is the
author of a recent article the new
geography who profits in a postamerican
world that was in foreign affairs and
he's not one to like sort of dance
around big issues.
>> He doesn't mince his words.
>> Yeah. So this is when I say perfect
guest to talk about this. Someone that
was like, "Okay, if we talk to Adam
Posen, we can actually really like talk
about all these things that maybe many
people are anxious to talk about." So
Adam, thank you so much for coming back
on OddLots. Great to see you again here
at Jackson Hall.
>> Thank you for having me back and
congratulations Tracy and Joe on the
upwards profile of OddLots ever higher.
So it's very cool.
>> Very kind of you to say. Are we right
that there is a certain surality to the
vibes here right now?
>> Yeah, it is. As you said, there was a
lot of deliberate focusing down of chair
pal speech and there's been a lot of
self-discipline of members of the FOMC
and everybody to be quite restrained uh
at a time when the attacks on the Fed
and the weaponization of government
files to attack individual Fed members
and so on is going on. I think Tracy's
absolutely right and we didn't script
this in advance but it is all part of
this broader context of do you keep
inflation expectations anchored do you
have faith in the dollar do you have
faith in the credit of the US do you
have faith in US foreign policy and
those are all things which Fed officials
are not supposed to talk about with the
exception of the inflation expectations
and on the inflation expectations even
there they're reluctant to talk about it
because it can becomes self-fulfilling.
If they talk about worrying about it,
then it starts to unravel. But also, to
be fair, because the
>> seeming message of the rapid come down
in inflation that we talked about our
last two times we were together in
Jackson Hall over 2022
was due to having anchored long-term
inflation expectations. At least that's
one argument. But it is surreal, Joe. I
mean, I I've gotten to talk to several
of the members of the committee and they
are trying to get on with their lives
and um it's hard. But I also just want
to emphasize it's not that different
than their colleagues in Washington at
the Treasury or at EPA or at the Bureau
of Labor Statistics that they also are
under attack. So, we've done an episode
on this before, but I would love to get
your take. What exactly happens to
central banks when their credibility
starts to come under attack or even when
maybe on the fiscal side you see
politicians interfere a little bit more
with monetary policy even if that
interference is just a truth social post
or something like that?
>> Yeah, I think Tracy the emphasis is
should be on the latter part of what you
said. When elected officials who are
superior to central banks in any power
struggle, when fiscal policy, which if
it gets really out of whack, has what's
called dominance, fiscal dominance, can
overpower whatever monetary policy is.
When the context for central banking
changes, then it's not so much
necessarily the credibility of the
central bank per se. It's the
credibility of the central bank will be
allowed to deliver what it's supposed to
deliver. And I'm not saying that to make
excuses for the central bank. There are
instances like Arthur Burns in the 70s
where the central bank itself is
compromised and fails to deliver. But I
think that's the way to see it. And
where you see it is where we're already
seeing it in the US, which is you see it
in a slightly higher risk premium on
long-term government bonds. You see it
in weakening of the currency. And you
know, some of this I think can be tied
to the broader, again, I'm sorry to keep
coming back to that, but to the broader
Trump economic agenda. As both of you
said, it is a real regime change, but
we're seeing it already. And so there's
a chart in this foreign affairs article,
the new economic geography I put out.
Thank you again. That does a simple
version of something a lot of
economists, academics have done, more
sophisticated versions, which is
basically the correlations on the dollar
have reversed,
>> right?
>> That with a couple interruptions in
2008, in the late '7s, early 80s, the
dollar has the quality that when it gets
into trouble, more money flows into it.
And even if the US is causing a problem
in the world, people believe they're
safer in the US than
>> 2008 was the ultimate example.
>> 2008 was the ultimate example. Dollar
adjust down. But basically, Treasury
bond rates and dollar move in lock step,
which is another way of saying they
don't have to put up the rates to defend
the dollar.
>> And it also means that most of the
movement in the dollar daytoday is just
macro news, just day-to-day news. And so
putting it simple-mindedly, there's a
correlation very strongly positive in
intraday intrae data between the dollar
and the 10-year Treasury rate until
April 1. April 1 of this year that
correlation shifts from plus 0.8 to
minus0.4.
It reverses sign. And what happens is
when something screwy happens in the US,
like we decide unilaterally to bomb
Iran, like when we do crazy stuff on one
big beautiful bill that's fiscally
irresponsible, like when Powell is
attacked in vicious terms by the
president. Gee, interest rates go up,
dollar goes down. That looks like an
emerging market. Anyway, this is this is
not just a data mining. You can do it in
very fancy econometric ways. You get the
same result. the correlation of safety
on the dollar has reversed and that
would be a sign of what you're talking
about Tracy.
>> Our friend Carrick Sankeran who's been
on the podcast always talks about sort
of the definition of an emerging market
is if your rates at the long end go up
in the recession, right? Because you
know in times of crisis in the US
historically you're like oh things are
really bad in the US. I'm going to pile
into dollars at treasuries. This is what
you're talking about which is that that
reflex has not kicked in exactly this
time since we've got four and a half
months of very clear data. it's going
the other way. A lot of the things the
Trump administration is doing are going
to reinforce that because they've talked
about taxing foreign investors
differently in the US than domestic
investors. They've talked about
punishing people who try to switch out
of the dollar. Steven Moran, who's been
nominated to be Federal Reserve Board
Governor, you know, has talked about a
Mara Lago accord and re putting the
dollar down. There's real reason for it
to behave this way. Now talk to us about
like your your foreign affairs piece
like the sort of you know this idea of
like the restructuring of the global and
who profits from it because you also
talk about this idea of like the US is
like sort of the global insurer of last
resort but talk to us a little bit about
what this whole piece was about.
>> Thank you Joe and and this goes to what
Tracy was saying at the start about how
what you think you're achieving with
this world change. So what I'm trying to
argue is that the Trump administration
decided that the world economy is
playing the US for a sucker and that
very harsh direct bilateral measures
starting with tariffs but also with
other threats, demands for investment,
demands for military assaults on social
media, all these things, threats to
withhold military assistance in the case
of Ukraine and others that this will be
a rebalancing that this will get more
money from these countries into the US
and thereby make our fiscal situation
better, be fairer and somehow do great
things for the US economy.
This is wrong on every level. But the
fundamental point going to the insurer
is I build a mental model, not a
mathematical model, but a mental model
that I think most people have found
quite apt that for the last 80 years
since World War II, the US's main role
in the world economy has been to be the
insurance provider. We made sure that
you could ship things through with
through different oceans and get there
safely. That there was basically respect
for property rights, respect for
intellectual property rights. There were
some standards, particularly technical
standards, some brands. There was a
dollar that you could get in and out of
and park money in. And it was deep
enough markets and treasuries that you
could get in and out that nobody cared
and it didn't affect prices. There was
stability to US currency into the
treasuries that let you do that. Just a
whole host of things. Plus military and
alliance as well, obviously for NATO
allies, for Japan, for Korea and others.
And we charged premiums for that. We did
get premiums. We had much lower interest
rates. People would put a lot of money
into US government debt and that made
the whole economy go off better. We had
basically obedience from all these
countries and military alliances that
they would do sanctions for the most
part. If we wanted to do sanctions, they
would in Okinawa in in Rinmine Air Base,
they would take our troops and support
them and have them garrisoned in their
country. to have our troops forward and
doing this whole host of things. And on
the economic front, it gave us
disproportionate shares not just of the
stable investment in treasuries,
but things like our standards for
technology, our standards for legal
matters, our our financial system were
the default. Anyways, this had lots of
benefits, lots of benefits for them,
lots of benefits for us. It was a good
business.
Essentially, what's happened is you have
a beach house in Malibu which you had
insured and you weren't going to build
the beach house unless it was insured.
Fine. You're paying insurance. You're
getting something for it. Now there's
global warming. Hurricanes are more
likely. There's erosion in the beach.
You're prepared to pay a bit more for
your insurance. But instead, you find
your insurer has decided, "Nope, we're
going to deny your claims or you have to
slip something under the table to get
your claim adjusted. Nope, we're
tripling your premium and if you don't
like it, we're going to leave the state
and you're not going to have insurance
anymore. That's what the Trump
administration is doing.
>> I mean, the role of insurance also acts
as a sort of like umbrella for economic
development, right? Because if you have
insurance on the beach in Malibu, other
people can build houses and you can have
shops and things and maybe your house
price starts to rise and you benefit
from that. So, this is a slightly unfair
question because I'm going to ask you to
channel someone else's thinking, but
what exactly is the argument from the
Trump administration here as to why they
are losing out from the current
international economic or financial
order which very much seems to have been
built by the US and as you pointed out
has a lot of tangible and intangible
benefits for America. Well, this is
something I and colleagues of the
Peterson Institute have been struggling
against for several years now. Uh, not
just Trump. There are people on the
Democratic side who've had this view as
well. So, in the same issue of foreign
affairs, Wally Adamo, who you know, who
was deputy treasury secretary in the
Biden administration, has an article,
yes, the trade system was broken. During
the Biden presidency, the US trade
representative gave a speech in which
she said she basically agreed with
everything her predecessor, Robert
Lighheiser, had said during the Trump
adation. So, this has been out there a
long time.
>> Yeah,
>> I know you want me to answer a question,
but I'm I'm not going to try to
rationalize it. I think there are three
or four things going on. One is there is
an excessive sense that China has been
unfair, but even more so that China got
away with being unfair and is dangerous
because of things we did on the economic
side.
>> And I don't think this is justified. Not
that I have any love for the Chinese
Communist Party. I'm on record calling
she an autocrat, but just that Tom Brady
and Bill Bich didn't win Super Bowls
because they cheated
in a little ways. China did not become
China because it cheated a little bit
here and there. The second thing is
there was a legitimate concern which the
Biden people cared about and the Trump
people say they care about but don't
seem to care about that if we're too
dependent on concentrated single sources
for things like the semiconductors in
Taiwan that puts us at a national
security risk. That puts us at an
economic risk. The reason I say the
Trump people don't seem to genuinely
care about that is because being totally
concentrated in the US in one spot isn't
any good either because then you're
subject still to natural disasters, to
terrorism, to political problems, to
corruption. You can care about this and
say we got to make sure it's
diversified.
Third thing that's going on is there's a
perception fed by the so-called China
shock literature that US manufacturing
was devastated and this led to
particular small cities and towns in the
US being devastated.
There's a lot of exaggerations and
problems with this literature and it
doesn't square well with the reality
including the reality that most of the
places that are cited as having had
problems had problems in the 70s and
that there's plenty of places like
Pittsburgh and Raleigh, North Carolina
that got back. But anyway, there's that
sense and I think you've had on my
colleague Robert Lawrence from Peterson
and Harvard who talks about the limits
of a manufacturing strategy. And then
finally, and this is my own
interpretation. People get mad at me
when I say this. I think there's a lot
of displaced anger. I think there are
people who were relatively privileged.
They weren't necessarily rich, but
relatively privileged in older society
in the way the US society used to be
that have been disrupted and offended by
change and by
>> forces towards equality. I also think
there's a bunch of people who are
understandably very angry and
disappointed with elites after the 2008
financial crisis after co been
perceptions of mishandling after the
Iraq Afghanistan invasions and
occupations for 20 years that didn't
produce anything. So there's a lot of
anger that's discredited
that of discredited elites who are
associated with being globalists, right?
But I don't think that anger is well
placed. And and I'm not trying to be
patronizing. I mean, we've seen this in
the US history and other history. you
know, people will stir up anger against
immigrants or stir up anger against
Native Americans or people of color or
refugees or com mythical communists in
the government in the 50s because
they're angry about something else or
they're scared of something else, but it
gets blamed on that. So, that's where I
think it comes from. But I just want to
emphasize what you've said at the start
and that's part of the point my article
is trying to make is there's a very
clear list of benefits the US had by
running the system and by had a good
business model was a profitable business
model providing insurance and like you
said if you're providing insurance for
some people that lets commerce expand
and it lets other people free ride and
that's a good thing that they free ride
and because then then you get more
commerce and more taxes and more
livelihood and better off people. And
additionally, one thing where the
analogy breaks down, it's even more
favorable for the US because, you know,
if you're Chub or Liberty Mutual or or
State Farm Insurance, you don't really
have a big effect on the extent of risks
out there by how much insurance you
give. But if you're the US and you say,
"I'm going to guarantee your security,"
you actually do reduce the risks that
are out there. And that means you're
collecting the same premiums and paying
out less
[Music]
at the risk of uh carrying the insurance
analogy too far. I mean, it is true that
we have insurers pulling out of areas
like Florida because they say it's no
longer economic to insure these areas.
It's just too risky. It's going to cost
too much to rebuild. Is there a case to
be made at all here that maybe maybe the
Trump administration is looking around
the world and saying, "Well, it's
riskier now than it was before and we
don't want to be on the hook to put out
a billion fires." I think there is a
case to be made in the national security
sphere more narrowly defined that the US
may have overextended or needs to
prioritize and there is a set of foreign
policy thinkers out there talking about
this issue. I still don't think that's
quite right because actually deterrence
and protection kind of like you said
before there's an umbrella effect. But
let's say that the national security
part you can set aside and say there is
an argument to be had. The rest of it
doesn't make any sense because you're
giving up strength of the dollar and
lower interest rates. You're giving up
disproportionate compared to your size
in the world foreign direct investment.
You're giving up disproportionate
compared to your size in the world,
influence over technical standards, love
for your brands, spread of your
services. You're giving up
disproportionate amounts of influence on
other populations. Again, it's just like
looking at foreign students coming here,
which I know you've talked about on some
of your episodes, that unless you come
up with some absolutely mythical number
of how many of them are not only spies
for the Chinese, but successfully pull
it off, are undetected, and take the
Chinese information that they couldn't
possibly have gotten through cyber
attacks and other means. Unless you come
up with an absolutely absurd number like
that, all the benefits come to us from
having foreign students here. And that's
what's can be said about all these
things on the economic side.
>> By the way, when you were talking about
the um you know what we had going, you
know, it's like that Breaking Bad speech
that I've seen is we had a good thing
going.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> You know, one of the reasons I like
talking to you, I do feel like it's
refreshing, frankly,
>> the sort of unreformed liberal cuz
everyone is like post, you know,
everyone's sort of post liberal now and
everyone. So, I appreciate that. Also,
two years ago when we first had you on
the podcast and you recommended Ezra
Vogel's biography of uh Deng Xiao Pang
to me and I then I read it the next
month and I read so I appreciate the
book recommend that led me down.
>> I think that's I was going to say that's
the thing that
>> led me down the whole rabbit hole. I
read like 50 books about 20th century
Chinese all thanks to you. But I want to
talk about China a little bit more
because I take all your points about
about everything. However, and you know,
you've been sort of like refreshingly
skeptical of a lot of these ideas that
it's particularly important to have more
manufacturing in the United States, etc.
But there is this very real concern that
without robust manufacturing, you
actually can't have a worldclass
military. And if you're just thinking
about like okay we provide this
insurance role in some ways very
literally say with our navy through
various straits around the world and
setting aside whether China cheated or
not. Should we be anxious if pure like
manufacturing capacity and the
technological frontier in building
things including weapons is in China?
>> Anxious is not the right word.
>> Okay.
>> And I appreciate you're saying about the
liberal and that's the part I didn't
say. I mean, I think a lot of people are
making the case that you I'm pushing
back against the tracing you asked about
because it's seems to be politically
advancable to to say that old-fashioned
liberal values are bad. In the case of
China, again, there's a difference
between arguing in a frankly not just
liberal but neoliberal, if I can use
that word, way that there is a specific
market failure
to make sure we have adequate minimum
sourcing and diversified sourcing of key
national security
inputs, right?
>> Yeah.
>> So, you know, that's fine. You can say
that and it's like, yeah, wouldn't it be
good if the defense department and the
commerce department and the intelligence
community actually had a process by
which they identified this
>> and actually had a ongoing commission
and had a list and had expert advice and
decided, excuse me, in a nonpartisan way
how to do that and then actually
marshaled specific money and measures to
do that.
And if you could do that, and you
should, that would affect, you know,
some tiny percentage of the US economy,
it might be incredibly important for
having drones or aircraft carriers or
whatever the right technology is. And
I'm not going to pretend I know what it
is,
>> okay?
>> To to keep the straits of Malaa open or
to keep the Taiwan straight open, but
you could do that. And when I was
fighting against the Biden
administration on some of their national
security excuses for economics
interventions and their industrial
policy a few years ago, I actually had a
meeting with a senior person in the
White House, not somebody that senior,
but senior enough. And I said, you know,
you guys have to have a list. You have
to do this. And this person laughed and
said, you got to be kidding me because
no one wants to write down a list
because once you write down a list, then
you're annoying certain people and
excluding others. And if you're the
defense department, you want to include
as many things as possible. And you know
the general dynamic of how these things
go. So I don't think the right response
is anxiety. I think the right response
is yeah, let's take this seriously.
Let's act like bloody grown-ups and
actually set up a policy process that
deals with this and let's do the
spending. And even to go back to the
international side, go to our specific
allies and say again, it's like raising
taxes on a specific thing where you're
tying it to a user fee or on in the
insurance. I'm raising your premiums not
threefold and threatening to leave. I'm
raising your premiums for 25%.
And if you put a fire detector in your
house, I will only raise it 20%. go to
Germany, go to Japan, go to Korea, go to
the Netherlands and say in the effect
I'm raising your premium, I want you to
spend this much more on defense, but if
you chip in specifically on this list of
military sensitive equipment, I won't
ask for as much.
>> Yeah, the carrots are kind of missing.
There's a lot of sticks and not that
many carrots. You touched on this just
now, but I'm basically going to ask
Joe's question in a slightly different
way, but are tariffs the right way to
bring manufacturing back to the US?
>> No. Sorry. You want more? Um, I mean,
look, again, because of the nature of
tariffs, which are a tax, which are a
distortion tax on a narrow part of the
tax base that has bad distributional
effects. They're regressive. They
primarily either hurt small business on
the corporate side or they hurt lower
income people on the household side and
they tend to lead to corruption even if
not literal bribes but distortions of
hey Apple showed up in the president's
office with a gold phone and what do you
know they got an exception to the tariff
you know it tend to lead to stuff like
that in a way that most things do
tariffs are good for two things right if
there is a very specific specific
industry and a very specific
bargaining situation
not against the whole world in general
all at the same time one specific
country with whom you can bargain and
you can get other people to join you in
the tariffs so it's effectively a form
of economic sanction that can work the
other thing is if you are an
underdeveloped country with no state
capacity
like the US in 1820 or a number of
>> South Asian and subsaran African and
Central American countries today even
there not that many tariffs are a way to
collect necessary revenues because you
can literally set up guards at the
border and make sure somebody gets the
money whereas other more less intrusive
less regressive more efficient forms of
taxation are harder to collect if you
don't have a good state capacity those
are the only two things tariffs are
>> this is a good point because I' you know
you see people like oh back in the old
days the golden manage tariffs. Well,
it's like we, you know, we didn't have
like W2 forms and stuff like that. There
was So, yeah, of course, you just have
to do it at the ports. Let's go back to
like, okay, setting aside the sort of
structural issues with tariffs and the
bad distribution effects, etc. Like just
right now in August 2025 and we look at
the state of the US economy and people
like how do you perceive the interaction
of tariffs with everything else that are
going on right now?
>> It's a fair question. We've done a lot
of work at the Peterson Institute,
colleagues of mine that we've published
and others have done slightly different
work and we all come out roughly the
same place. This is the way the Trump
administration is doing it in terms of
the short-term economic outlook is it's
a tax hike. It's stagflationary, meaning
it's raising inflation at the same time
as slowing growth. It's collecting a
sizable chunk of revenue on the order of
2002 250 billion a year at an annual
rate at this very high level of taxes.
That will probably diminish over time
because people get around that kind of
tax and people choose to produce things
elsewhere and people evade it. But for
the moment, it's a significant tax
increase that would have been better
done through more efficient means. It
also is going to do nothing for
manufacturing because what it does on
net is well there are certain industries
that are being helped as I know you've
covered in your supply chain stories you
know there are a lot of small businesses
or even big businesses
>> that have imported inputs whether from
China or elsewhere and it costs them and
it's going to be very hard to replace
that and it's very expensive and then
you've got the issue again which I know
you've covered, but has to be said that
there aren't American workers
for good reason. There aren't American
workers who want to be sitting there
screwing screws into the back of
iPhones. I don't mean to keep picking on
Apple, but it's just it's a it's a clear
example. So, you either have to pay them
an incredible amount for that or you
have to let somebody else do it. So in
the short term, getting back to the
monetary policy since we're in Jackson
Hole,
>> I think it's not a surprise that we
haven't had huge inflation yet from the
tariffs because there were a number of
things that mainstream people like us
expected. People were going to be in
denial about whether the tariffs would
stay and how big they would be. People
were going to have to take time to
figure out if you're a business whether
you can find a substitute source,
whether that substitute source is
domestic. If you move it to Vietnam,
does that really get you out of the
tariffs? Do you have a good
relationship? I mean, it takes, as
you've discussed in detail, these supply
chains emerge organically and they're
not top down. Somebody makes one
decision. So, it takes time to re
reformulate the supply chains if you're
signing the tariffs. Third, you've got a
bunch of companies that were called out
by name by President Trump, like GM or
Walmart, that were told, "Don't raise
prices because of the tariffs." And so,
of course, they're going to hold off as
long as they can. And then eventually,
when everybody's raising prices at ex
roughly the same time, they'll raise
prices. And then finally, a lot of these
companies and a lot of the consumer
goods companies had inventories and they
built up inventories in the first
quarter of imported goods. and they
weren't going to raise the prices until
passed through the tariff costs until
they got burnt through the inventories.
So you had four very solid reasons why
it would take at least a few months for
the tariffs to really start showing up
in prices. So if I'm sitting at the Fed
right now,
in my view, the tariff inflation just
goes up from here.
first round effects probably will peak
in second quarter of 2026
and then the debate is and I my estimate
is higher than most people's a lot of
people think it'll peak around four on
CPI I think it's going to peak closer to
a five or a little more
>> wow
>> and then the discussion which Governor
Wallers put out there which the chair
talked about today talked about in the
speech is how much do you think this
translates into a second round inflation
effects how persistent is this
inflation. And that's the interesting
debate and that's a good faith debate
you can have. But the tariff inflation
is coming.
It's on its way. It's not surprisingly
low. It's not surprisingly slow. It's a
tiny bit slower than I expected, but not
really. And we're here.
[Music]
Well, I'm going to take you up on the
debate tease, but where do you fall on
the side of uh the second order effects
debate? Because you can make it feels a
convincing argument for either side. You
could say that, well, tariffs are
attacks and so they destroy demand and
maybe lead to deflation. Or you could
argue that tariffs perhaps give
companies an excuse to all start raising
their prices together and so you don't
get that competitive activity that would
normally keep prices in check.
>> I think you can make a plausible serious
debate on both sides, but I think the
arguments are very clearly on the side
that the second round effects are going
to be large and persistent. There's
several reasons which is why I think
it's pretty clear. The first one is we
know from what happened with the tariffs
under Trump one under Biden from other
countries in recent times that the pass
through what generally you end up being
if you're the company that ultimately
buys the imported input or the household
that buys it the pass through the final
purchaser is usually 85 to 90% of the
tariff. It's already very clear from the
data that the foreign companies are not
paying for any of this. So the question
is how much are the importers eating it
versus passing it on and it takes a
little time for you to get to that but
generally it's a very robust result. So
even if you get less than that you get
65 70% on average that's still a lot.
The second is implicit in what you said
and then sometimes in things uh some of
the people on the other side of this
argument say is essentially the demand
destruction is either symmetric to the
price increase or is larger than the
price increase and there's no
particularly good reason to assume that.
So you have to look at what actually is
going on.
>> We have a pretty robust economy pretty
close to full employment. We are about
to get, though it hasn't shown up yet.
This to me is the big surprise, but
we're about to get more damage in a
stagflationary way from migration
restrictions, deportations, sudden stop
of growth in the labor force. That's
going to give American workers more
bargaining power in the short term.
That's going to create labor shortages,
which put upward pressure on wages.
That's going to decrease productivity
and and capacity. So on balance you may
get some recessionary forces out of both
that and the tariff increase but I
strongly doubt they will outweigh the
inflationary impulses that there will be
room for price setting price increases
excuse me and wage increases. Third,
going back to where one of the things
you said at the start, anchoring
inflation expectations is the game. That
ultimately is what allows a central bank
to say, as Bernanki, Labbach, Michigan,
and I argued 25 years ago in the
inflation targeting book, you're allowed
to look through the first round effect
of supply shocks if it's clear what the
supply shock is and you have anchored
expectations.
I think the Fed, whether they admit it
or to themselves or not, is publicly
underestimating how much the 2020 to
2022 experience deankored inflation
expectations. It didn't take us to
Argentina in 1980, but anybody who says
that they're the same as they were
before 2020, I think is deluding
themselves. And then additionally,
going back to what Joe was saying about
the surreal aspect of this time, if the
Trump administration has been, as they
have,
hugely attacking the independence of the
Fed in multiple ways, and this is
showing up in a less strong dollar,
then that's another reason to think that
the expectations aren't going to be
anchored, and you're not going to get an
offset from the currency.
to the tariff inflation. So bing bing
bing, that's four reasons
why I think the argument is clear that
we're going to get more inflation, more
persistence of inflation, more second
round effects than some people are
saying. I have a question. I've been
asking this to a bunch of people. I'm
not totally satisfied with any of the
answers I've gotten. So I'm going to try
again. Even before the tariffs, even
before Trump, it appeared that from the
perspective of the market that long-term
rates were going to be durably higher
than they had been in the decade prior
to yco. How come? What changed?
>> So, isn't there a place where I'm
there's a legitimate real discussion and
I'm very strongly on one side of it.
>> Okay. So I think the useful discussion
all credit goes to Larry Summers roughly
was it 2019 2018 he gave the speech
about secular stagnation
>> reviving the concept from Alvin Hansen
and oh sorry that was much earlier he
gave that speech then he gave the speech
in 2019 in which he said secular
stagnation may be ending and he made a
number of points but the biggest one was
if you're in an environment where you're
going to have sustained expansionary
fiscal policy pushing up demand and
meeting shortfalls of demand then the
rstar the neutral interest rate is
higher and that's that's pretty clear
economics and then the reasons which he
said and others of us have developed I
think are right that going back to the
insurance metaphor the risks are higher
now there's climate change China is no
matter whose fault it is or whether it
was inevitable or not China is more of a
security threat than it was Russia is
more belligerent than it was people have
to spend more on that our societies are
aging at least our almost all the large
societies with the exception of India
are aging and you have to spend more on
healthcare and more on social security
all of these things are going to lead to
sustained increases in government
spending irrespective of whatever else
you do and they are unlikely as we've
already seen to be fully tax financed so
that is a fundamental the second
fundamental I would argue that's pushing
up our star is that we don't know when
AI is going to kick in. We don't know
how big an effect. We don't know how
many jobs. You guys again have had many
good guests talking about this, but I
think we can all agree that sometime
between 2 and 10 years from now there
will be a meaningful increase in the
productivity growth trend. There are a
few smart people like Osmoglu and
Johnson who say no. But most of us think
>> interesting
>> that there will be an increase of some
sort. Now I don't have to go all the way
to Mackenzie Global Institute and
believe you know it's some enormous
number but whatever it is that number an
improvement in productivity growth trend
is generally one for one should be
thought of as raising the
equilibrium interest rate because you're
raising the average return on capital
essentially.
>> That's totally counterintuitive to me. I
would have thought that a big
productivity increase would be all
things equal disinflationary and rates
lower and It's it's disinflationary
but it remember inflation we should
think about as a short-term phenomenon a
cyclical phenomenon not as a structural
phenomenon. So it's disinflationary in
the sense that in any gi for while the
productivity gain is ongoing you're
getting more stuff for less but as a
structural matter you are raising the
average returns on capital in the
society and so all capital that's
competing has to compete with a higher
return and so therefore our star is up
>> interesting
>> so now that we are deep in ourstar
territory I'm going to ask a central
banking question with your central bank
hat on So you mentioned stagflation. He
actually has visitors at home. His
central bank hat is a Boston Red Sox cat
for those who those aren't in the room.
>> That's right. All right. So you
mentioned stagflation earlier. What
exactly are central banks supposed to do
when they're faced with a stagflationary
scenario? Because we just listened to
pal talk about downside risks to
employment and upside risks to
inflation. He clearly seemed to choose
the labor market over the inflationary
risk at this moment in time. But there's
clearly a trade-off. You have to make a
choice here.
>> Yes. And this is why you try to avoid
bad policies such as the ones the Trump
administration are doing which get you
into a stagflationary situation if you
can. Essentially, it's a contingent
choice. And this is why the Fed is right
to be putting so much emphasis on
debating over second round effects of
inflationary shocks and things like you
were saying how much pricing power there
is. How much recessionary effect do you
get from these station? It's essentially
a balance issue. If you're forced to
choose between the two goals, the two
halves of the Fed's mandate, but the two
goals for any central bank,
essentially you have to go after the one
that's more likely to spiral out of
control.
>> Ah, so this is their argument that labor
market deterioration can be very nonid
linear, right? It can kind of explode.
>> Yeah. Nonlinear is the way they think of
it. I think again it's another reason I
would take the other side because the
evidence is yes and there was the
discussion about the so-called SOM rule
that you can have these very rapid
increases in unemployment
but what we've seen is much to people's
surprise but has to be taken seriously
is both after 2008
and after 2020 so after the financial
crisis after COVID unemployment actually
came down pretty
And there wasn't evidence of what
economists call hysteresus,
which is the idea that once you put a
lot of people out of work, it's harder
for them to get back into work. And so
it's taken from engineering. It's a
concept that was very true of Europe in
the 70s and 80s that every time you got
an unemployment rate hike because of a
recession, it wouldn't come all the way
back down to where it was before the
recession because there would be a
certain number of people who couldn't
get back into work. and ahead of the
2008 crisis and during it including what
my time at the Bank of England speeches
and then chair pal and others in 2020
during co worried a lot about this
potential for permanently having rises
in the unemployment rate.
>> Yeah.
>> And but the thing is all the evidence
from 2008 and all the evidence from 2020
is that didn't happen. And again, it was
a surprise, but it's a really important
and a really robust result.
>> You really are an unreformed neoliberal
because so many people have accepted the
opposite. Everyone almost everyone
thinks there's some hysteresis
and like I said, I respect it.
>> Well, it's I'm not in this is not so
much I appreciate that joke, but this is
not so much being a neoliberal as being
an empiricist. So, so I mean on my staff
at of a colleague of mine is Olivia
Blanchard and he coined the hysteresus
concept 40 years ago and he and Larry
Summers and a co-author his name of
course I forget I apologize did a paper
in 2013 it was like the first paper they
did for us after I took over at Peterson
looking for hysteresus effects in the
2008 to10 data and they couldn't find it
and then Powell again I think with a
great deal of sympathy from me and
others talked a lot about hysteresus for
why they were so aggressive in cutting
in response to co
>> but then again we know the unemployment
rate came right down so people care
about this they're coming from a good
place to care about this but it's not
neoliberal it's the evidence the
evidence isn't there and so the
implication is not that you shouldn't
care about unemployment you should have
temporary measures of fiscal policy like
we did during COVID to extend
unemployment insurance to extend health
insurance to make it less miserable for
people who are unemployed, but the
inflation is probably the thing that's
more likely to get out of control in my
view.
>> Tracy asked you a question putting on
your monetary policy hat, but I'm going
to ask you a question specifically with
your monetary policy committee hat
having served at the now the hat
backwards. Um, having served at the Bank
of England, long-term rates in the UK
are higher than the so-called Liz Truss
moment. And I asked you a question about
this last year and it was very vague at
the time. I was like, "What's going on
with the UK?" And because it always
seems like there's some sort of mess.
But now I actually have something
specific to ask, which is what's going
on with the UK in the sense that it
seems bad in terms that rates are very
high. What What's going on there?
>> I think I said to you when you asked
about this last year, Joe, that
>> the single biggest call I got wrong in
terms of analysis and forecasting in my
career was 2012 at Bank of England.
I and some others on the committee at
the time, but I'm responsible for me
said,
"Yeah, productivity has been lower the
last few years to 2012 because of the
financial crisis, but it's going to come
back up because it's been the same
long-term trend since 1850."
And and there was nothing destroying a
trend from
>> Yeah. I don't remember if it's 1850 or
1860, but there's some incredibly long
data series we have for UK productivity
growth. And even if you watch it, it's
just a straight upward line. And even
the Great Depression sort of makes a
little blip and World War II makes a
little blip and this and then suddenly
in 2008 it goes flat
>> and I and a bunch of other people said,
"Well, it's not like the Blitz, right?"
And so productivity growth is going to
come back up to trend. It never did.
Huh?
>> The UK is the one rich economy,
high-income economy, where productivity
growth not just went down for a while,
but kept going down. And so now we've
had a dozen years of very low
productivity growth in the UK
and at some point that catches up with
you. Um, and I think that's the way to
look at it is you throw Brexit in on top
of that, which may be one of the reasons
why productivity growth hasn't come
back. And there's debate about that, but
they have been running making less with
more rather than more with less for a
very long time. And wages and prices and
the pound all haven't dropped
accordingly. So it's not like
unfortunately Greece suffered through
say or Portugal during the financial
crisis. And so something's out of whack.
And this shows up eventually in the
fiscal policy, which is what you're
talking about, that they have a bunch of
really hard choices to make. If the
government, the current Labor government
doesn't make lots of cuts, the interest
rates keep going up.
>> Yeah.
>> If they do make lots of cuts, then
probably growth doesn't improve. So,
they're just in a really, really tough
situation. So Joe asked you a question
with your BOE hat on and I'm going to
ask something similar which is one of
the things that makes Jackson Hole such
a big deal is that we don't just have
the Fed here. We also have other central
bankers uh like the ECB, the BOJ and you
see them do the classic walk with the
Fed chair every year. When it comes to
central bank credibility and the
independence issue, what do you think
those other central bankers are thinking
here? And do they possibly use some of
Jackson Hole? We're still waiting to
hear from them. That usually happens on
Saturday morning. We're recording this
on Friday afternoon. Do you think they
maybe use this as a platform to try to
push back against some of it? So, the
central bankers, both publicly and in
conversations I've had with them from
around the world, are shocked and
horrified that the Trump administration
is doing this to the Fed. Beyond just
the obvious, they're sympathetic to
their colleagues from the Fed and it's
pretty yucky is just the fact that they
have taken it for granted. The entire
economics profession has taken it for
granted for more than 40 years going
back to a classic paper by Ken Rogoff in
1986 and then some subsequent work
others did that in central bank
independence is good. It reduces
inflation and reduces the volatility of
inflation on average for a country in a
large way without reducing the average
growth rate. Full stop. And this is
lived experience. This is what the
European Central Bank was based on. This
is why the Bundus Bank and the Germans
were willing to give up sovereignty to
the European Central Bank. This is the
standard practice that dozens of
countries have adopted. The Bank of
Japan got independence over the last 30
years.
So, it's kind of like with trade
economists in the past, but even more on
questions. It's like, you know, this is
like questioning vaccines, which of
course nowadays people do, but at one
point would have been thought of as what
kind of anti-scientific illiterate are
you that you would question central bank
independence? So, I mean, there's no way
to exaggerate. That's the response. At
various international versions of
central bank summer camp, you know,
which is what Jackson Hole is. So, the
ECB has their version which is called
the CRA conference. And this year at
CRA, everybody was rallying around Jay
the sheriff pal and there were public
statements about central bank
independence and support for him at the
BIS annual meeting which is a sort of
similar thing which this year I got
invited to. I don't usually get invited
to that. I do get this. Anyway, again,
there were public statements, there were
private statements. Everyone was
rallying around. But as we discussed,
the Fed leadership seems to have decided
that Chair Pal should not mention a word
about central bank independence in his
speech this year. And so, this is pure
extrapolation. By the time this
recording comes out, we'll find out.
Yeah. But my expectation is they will
have passed a memo to ECB President
Lagarde, Bank of England Governor
Bailey, Bank of Japan, Governor Auea,
who are the three big central bank
governors speaking on Saturday. Please
don't talk about it. And I think what
they've probably decided
is having foreign central bankers talk
about this would not play well in
Magaland
and might just induce more problems with
the Trump people. So I think the
instinct of the foreign central bankers
here would be to talk very loudly about
this, but I think they explicitly or
implicitly have been told not to. Well,
this is exciting because by the time
this comes out, this will either have
been our listeners will already know.
>> We'll already you'll either be very
wrong or very right. Edison,
>> always great catching up with you and uh
we'll do it again next year.
>> Thank you for having me. Congrats to
both of you. Great substantive
discussion.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
Tracy, I I love our annual catchup with
Adam. It really He was like the perfect
guest because he'd just say whatever.
Just say what's on his mind.
>> Well, at a time when a lot of people
don't want to talk about this stuff,
right?
>> Yeah. When people are like anxious, when
people feel like there's like
recriminations where people people want
to people want to keep low. Yeah. People
want to keep their heads low at a time
when they don't know if there's going to
be some attack on them from the White
House or, you know, on Twitter or TR.
People want to keep low. And Adam, I
appreciate his cander.
>> Can I just say I'm always really
impressed by people who are able to
organize their thoughts in real time to
be like, well, there are three reasons.
Number one, that's right. That's right,
Joe.
>> But that was a fantastic conversation.
One thing well I guess the thing that I
still don't get and I think it is really
hard to make an argument that the US has
lost out from an economic and financial
and in some respects political system
around the world that it has helped to
create right like there are tangible
instances where you can say like the US
benefits in sometimes incredibly weird
ways like if you look at the debt crisis
in like 2013 or 2011 You know this is a
crisis emanating from the US from the
United States from US politics and what
you saw was investors flock to the
security of US treasuries and you know
yields actually go down which helps with
US debt. So there are these like
sometimes perverse benefits that the
Trump administration seems to want to
throw away. You know, one thing I will
say that I was thinking about in your
intro is and I go think back to, you
know, that book trade wars are class
wars, which I think is actually I
suspect Adam almost very disagrees with
the premise of that book, etc. But
regardless of where you stand on some of
these questions,
>> there is that relationship between you
can't disrupt the domestic without
disrupting the international and or vice
versa. Like these are like inextricably
linked. if you perceive to be there some
sort of inequality in the United States
or whatever it is these things like the
trading relationship all of these things
they are interlin so it's like one thing
to say like you know there's this view
is like oh knocking over all of these
different institutions I think they're
they're linked in fundamental ways and
there it sort of makes sense that if you
you know you go after the Fed because
you perceive whatever that that's part
and parcel of the whole thing
>> you can argue they're linked but I would
say if you're trying to solve domestic
inequality through international means.
That doesn't seem that it seems like the
emphasis and the focus is wrong. I guess
what I'm saying is I'm not surprised
that it all goes to because like that
was my toy for like like that that the
sort of Klein Pettis theory etc that you
know there's this inequality in the
United States because of these winners
and losers from the international
trading system right and so we fight
these trade wars etc because we are it's
about something internal that rectifying
some sort of internal imbalance and so I
do think like I I get so this just gets
to all I'm saying is I'm not surprised
at all goes together because then I see
I get
>> as part of like a policy agenda
>> but it's possible that we should be
looking at domestic policy more rather
than fighting with trading partners.
>> That also seems
>> you're not going to say you're lying low
now.
>> No, I'm just saying I don't have an
opinion on the right way to do it. I'm
just saying I'm not surprised that this
is one way.
>> Okay. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Adam Posen at Adam Posen. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman Dashel Bennett at Dashbot and
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloom.com/odddlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoy all thoughts, if you
like our annual tradition of catching up
with Adam Posen at Jackson Hole, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
Yeah.
[Music]
Hey.